---
title: Does Your Philosophy of Science Matter in Practice?
---

*This is a more extensive overview of the contents discussed in the lecture.
This assignment contains several questions for you to reflect on. Your answers
to these questions aren’t right or wrong – they are simply your view on this
matter. Therefore, this assignment can not be graded, but feel free to use the
discussion forum to exchange ideas about these topics with others, if you like.*

We can broadly distinguish philosophies of science concerning ideas about truth,
and how our theories relate to truth in three main categories (following
Niiniluoto, 1999). First, there is the view that there is no truth, known as
**anarchism**. An example of this can be found in Paul Feyerabend’s ‘Against
Method’ where he writes: Science is an essentially anarchic enterprise:
theoretical anarchism is more humanitarian and more likely to encourage progress
than its law-and-order alternatives” and “The only principle that does not
inhibit progress is: anything goes.” The second category contains
**pragmatism**, in which ‘truth’ is replaced by some surrogate, such as social
consensus. For example, Pierce writes: “The opinion which is fated to be
ultimately agreed to by all who investigate, is what we mean by the truth”.
Rorty doubts such a final end-point of consensus can ever be reached, and
suggests giving up on the concept of truth and talk about an indefinite
adjustment of belief. The third category consists of approaches that believe
there is who define truth as some correspondence between our statements or
propositions about the world and reality, known as **correspondence theories**.
In essence, these approaches adhere to a dictionary definition of truth as
‘being in accord with fact or reality’. However, these approaches differ in
whether they believe scientific theories have a truth value (i.e., whether
theories can be true or false), and if theories have truth value, whether this
is relevant for scientific practice.

**Q1**: What do you think? Is anarchy the best way to do science? Is there no
truth, but at best an infinite updating of belief with some hope of social
consensus? Or is there some real truth that we can get closer to over time?

It is possible to have different philosophies of science because success in
science is not measured by whether we discover the truth. After all, how would
we ever know for sure we discovered the truth? Whatever your position on truth
in science, a more tangible goal for science is to make **scientific progress**.
This means we do not immediately need to agree on what truth looks like, but it
means we will have to define what progress in science looks like. And to have
progress in science, science needs to have a goal.

Kitcher (1993, chapter 4) writes: “One theme recurs in the history of thinking
about the **goals of science**: science ought to contribute to "the relief of
man's estate," it should enable us to control nature—or perhaps, where we cannot
control, to predict, and so adjust our behavior to an uncooperative world—it
should supply the means for improving the quality and duration of human lives,
and so forth.” Truth alone is not a sufficient aim for scientific progress, as
Popper (1934) already noted, because then we would just limit ourselves to
positing trivial theories (e.g., for psychological science the theory that ‘it
depends’), or collect detailed but boring information (the temperature in the
room I am now in is 19.3 degrees). Kitcher highlights two important types of
progress: **conceptual progress** and **explanatory progress**. Conceptual
progress comes from refining the concepts we talk about, such that we can
clearly specify these concepts, and preferably reach consensus about them.
Explanatory progress is improved by getting a better understanding of the causal
mechanisms underlying phenomena. Scientists will probably recognize the need for
both. We need to clearly define our concepts, and know how to measure them, and
we often want to know how things are related, or how to manipulate things.

**Q2**: Think about your own research. Is it more focus on conceptual progress,
or more focused on explanatory progress. What should the balance between these
two goals in science be, for your own research? Are the concepts you use clearly
defined and generally agreed upon? And what is the balance currently?

This distinction between conceptual progress and explanatory progress aligns
roughly with a distinction about progress with respect to the entities we study,
and the theories we build that explain how these entities are related, where a
scientific theory is defined as a set of testable statements about the relation
between observations. As noted before, philosophies of science differ in whether
they believe statements about entities and theories are related to the truth,
and if they are, whether this matters for how we do science. Let’s discuss four
flavors of philosophies of science that differ in how much value they place in
whether the way we talk about theories and entities corresponds to an objective
truth.

**Instrumentalism**

According to instrumentalism, theories should be seen mainly as tools to solve
practical problems, and not as truthful descriptions of the world. Theories are
instruments that generate predictions about things we can observe. Theories
often refer to unobservable entities, but these entities do not have truth or
falsity, and neither do the theories. Scientific theories should not be
evaluated based on whether they correspond to the true state of the world, but
based on how well they perform.

One important reason to suspend judgment about whether theories are true or
false is because of underdetermination (for an explanation, see Ladyman, 2002).
We often do not have enough data to distinguish different possible theories. If
it really isn’t possible to distinguish different theories because we would not
be able to collect the required data, it is often difficult to say whether one
theory is closer to the truth than another theory.

From an instrumentalist view on scientific progress, and assuming that all
theories are underdetermined by data, additional criteria to evaluate theories
become important, such as **simplicity**. Researchers might use approximations
to make theories easier to implement, for example in computational models, based
on the convictions that simpler theories provide more useful instruments, even
if they are slightly less accurate about the true state of the world.

**Constructive Empiricism**

As opposed to instrumentalism, constructive empiricism acknowledges that
theories can be true or not. However, it limits **belief in theories** only in
as far as they describe observable events. Van Fraassen, one of the main
proponents of constructive empiricism, suggests we can use a theory without
believing it is true when it is *empirically adequate*. He says: “a theory is
empirically adequate exactly if what it says about the observable things and
events in the world, is true”. Constructive empiricist might decide to use a
theory, but does not have to believe it is true. Theories often make statements
that go beyond what we can observe, but constructive empiricists limit truth
statements to observable entities. Because no truth values are ascribed to
unobservable entities that are assumed to exist in the real world, this approach
is grouped under ‘anti-realist’ philosophies on science.

**Entity Realism**

Entity realists are willing to take one step beyond constructive empiricism and
acknowledge a belief in unobservable entities when a researcher can demonstrate
impressive causal knowledge of an (unobservable) entity. When knowledge about an
unobservable entity can be used to manipulate its behavior, or if knowledge
about the entity can be used to manipulate other phenomena, one can believe that
it is real. However, researchers remain skeptical about scientific theories.

Hacking (1982) writes, in a very accessible article, how: “The vast majority of
experimental physicists are realists about entities without a commitment to
realism about theories. The experimenter is convinced of the existence of plenty
of "inferred" and "unobservable" entities. But no one in the lab believes in the
literal truth of present theories about those entities. Although various
properties are confidently ascribed to electrons, most of these properties can
be embedded in plenty of different inconsistent theories about which the
experimenter is agnostic.” Researchers can be realists about entities, but
anti-realists about models.

**Q3**: Psychologists often talk about latent variables. Latent refers to the
fact that these variables are not measured directly, but are *inferred*,
typically through statistical models (for formal definitions, see Bollen, 2002).
Some psychologists, such as B. F. Skinner, do not believe in the existence of
latent variables. This view is more in line with constructive empiricism. On the
other hand, many psychologists do believe in latent constructs, a view that is
more in line with entity realism (or maybe even scientific realism, discussed
below). What do you think? Do you believe latent variables are real, or do you
prefer to limit statements to observable events?

**Scientific Realism**

We can compare the constructive empiricist view with scientific realism. For
example, Niiniluoto (1999) writes that in contrast to a constructive empiricist:

“a scientific realist sees theories as attempts to reveal the true nature of
reality even beyond the limits of empirical observation. A theory should be
cognitively successful in the sense that the theoretical entities it postulates
really exist and the lawlike descriptions of these entities are true. Thus, the
basic aim of science for a realist is true information about reality. The
realist of course appreciates empirical success like the empiricist. But for the
realist, the truth of a theory is a precondition for the adequacy of scientific
explanations.”

For scientific realists, verisimilitude, or ‘truthlikeness’ is treated as the
basic epistemic utility of science. It is based on the empirical success of
theories. As De Groot (1969) writes: “The criterion par excellence of true
knowledge is to be found in the ability to predict the results of a testing
procedure. If one knows something to be true, he is in a position to predict;
where prediction is impossible, there is no knowledge.”

**Q4**: Think about the scientific theory that is currently most important for
the work that you do and the predictions you are making. Do you think this
scientific theory reveals the true nature of reality? Or do you perhaps see it
more as a useful instrument that can be used to generate predictions about
things we can observe?

**Progress in Science**

There are more similarities than differences between almost all philosophies of
science. All approaches believe a goal of science is progress. Anarchists
refrain from specifying what progress looks like. Feyerabend writes: “my thesis
is that anarchism helps to achieve progress in any one of the senses one care to
choose” – but progress is still a goal of science. For instrumentalists, the
proof is in the pudding – theories are good, as long they lead to empirical
progress, regardless of whether these theories are true. For a scientific
realist, theories are better the closer the more verisimilitude they have, or
the closer the get to an unknown truth. For all approaches (except perhaps
anarchism) conceptual progress and explanatory progress are valued.

Conceptual progress is measured by increased **accuracy** in how a concept is
measured, and increased **consensus** on what is measured. Progress about
concerning measurement accuracy is easily demonstrated since it is mainly
dependent on the amount of data that is collected, and can be quantified by the
standard error of the measurement. Consensus is perhaps less easily
demonstrated, but Meehl (2004) provides some suggestions, such as a theory being
generally talked about as a ‘fact’, research and technological applications use
the theory but there is no need to study it directly anymore, and the only
discussions of the theory at scientific meetings are as in panels about history
or celebrations of past successes. We then wait for (and arguably arbitrary) 50
years to see if there is any change, and if not, we consider the theory accepted
by consensus. Although Meehl acknowledged this is a somewhat brute-force
approach to epistemology, he believes philosophers of science should be less
distracted by exceptions such as Newtonian physics that was overthrown after 200
years, and acknowledge this approach will probably work in practice most of the
time.

Explanatory progress is mainly measured by our ability to predict **novel
facts**. Whether **prediction** (showing a theoretical prediction is supported
by data) should be valued more than **accommodation** (adjusting a theory to
accommodate unexpected observations) is a [matter of
debate](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/prediction-accommodation). Some have
argued that it doesn’t matter if a theory is stated before data is observed or
after data is observed. Keynes writes: “The peculiar virtue of prediction or
predesignation is altogether imaginary. The number of instances examined and the
analogy between them are the essential points, and the question as to whether a
particular hypothesis happens to be propounded before or after their examination
is quite irrelevant.” It seems as if Keynes dismisses practices such as
pre-registration, but his statement comes with a strong caveat, namely that
researchers are completely unbiased. He writes: “to approach statistical
evidence without preconceptions based on general grounds, because the temptation
to ‘cook’ the evidence will prove otherwise to be irresistible, has no logical
basis and need only be considered when the impartiality of an investigator is in
doubt.”

Keynes’ analysis of prediction versus accommodation is limited to the evidence
in the data. However, Mayo (2018) convincingly argues we put more faith in
predicted findings than accommodated findings because the former have passed **a
severe test**. If data is used when generating a hypothesis (i.e., the
hypothesis has no *use-novelty*) the hypothesis will fit the data, no matter
whether the theory is true or false. It is guaranteed to match the data, because
the theory was constructed with this aim. A theory that is constructed based on
the data has not passed a severe test. When novel data is collected in a
well-constructed experiment, a hypothesis is unlikely to pass a test (e.g.,
yield a significant result) if the hypothesis is false. The strength from not
using the data when constructing a hypothesis comes from the fact that is has
passed a more severe test, and had a higher probability to be proven wrong (but
wasn’t).

**Does Your Philosophy of Science Matter?**

Even if scientists generally agree that conceptual progress and explanatory
progress are valuable, and that explanatory progress can be demonstrated by
testing theoretical predictions, your philosophy of science likely influences
how much you weigh the different questions researchers ask when they do
scientific research. Research can be more theory driven, or more exploratory,
and it seems plausible your views on which you value more is in part determined
by your philosophy of science.

For example, do you perform research by pre-registering your experiments and
formalizing strict theoretical predictions, and collect data to corroborate or
falsify these predictions to increase the verisimilitude of the theory? Or do
you largely ignore theories in your field, and aim to accurately measure
relationships between variables? Developing strong theories can be useful for a
scientific field, because they facilitate the organization of known phenomena,
help to predict what will happen in new situations, and guide new research.
Collecting reliable information about phenomena can provide the information
needed to make decisions, and provides important empirical information that can
be used to develop theories.

**Q5**: One might argue that in many research areas researchers do not spend
enough effort validating measures. Research that validates measures is typically
considered less exciting than the discovery of new findings, even if these new
findings are discovered by using measures of questionable validity. In your own
research area, is the effort spent on validating measures and testing theory in
balance?

For a scientific realist a main aim is to test whether theories reflect reality.
Scientific research starts with specifying a falsifiable theory. The goal of an
experiment is to test the theory. If the theory passes the test, the theory
gains verisimilitude, if it fails a test, it loses verisimilitude, and needs to
be adjusted. If a theory repeatedly fails to make predictions (what Lakatos
calls a *degenerative research line*) it is eventually abandoned. If the theory
proves successful in making predictions, it becomes established knowledge.

For an entity realist like Hacking (1982), experiments provide knowledge about
entities, and therefore experiments determine what we believe, not theories. He
writes: “Hence, engineering, not theorizing, is the proof of scientific realism
about entities.” Van Fraassen similarly stresses the importance of experiments,
which are crucial in establishing facts about observable phenomena. He sees a
role for theory, but it is quite different of the role it plays in scientific
realism. Van Fraassen writes: “Scientists aim to discover facts about the
world—about the regularities in the observable part of the world. To discover
these, one needs experimentation as opposed to reason and reflection. But those
regularities are exceedingly subtle and complex, so experimental design is
exceedingly difficult. Hence the need for the construction of theories, and for
appeal to previously constructed theories to guide the experimental inquiry.”

**Theory-driven versus data-driven**

One might be tempted to align philosophies of science along a continuum of how
strongly theory driven they are (or *confirmatory*), and how strongly
data-driven they are (or *exploratory*). Indeed, Van Fraassen writes: “The
phenomenology of scientific theoretical advance may indeed be exactly like the
phenomenology of exploration and discovery on the Dark Continent or in the South
Seas, in certain respects.” Note that exploratory data-driven research is not
void of theory – but the role theories play has changed. There are two roles,
according to Fraassen. First, the outcome of an experiment is *‘filling in the
blanks in a developing theory’*. The second role theories play is in that, as
the regularities we aim to uncover become more complex, we need theory to guide
experimental design. Often a theory states there must be *something*, but it is
very unclear what this something actually is.

For example, a theory might predict there are individual differences, or
contextual moderators, but the scientist needs to discover which individual
differences, or what contextual moderators. In this instance, the theory has
many holes in it that need to be filled. As scientists fill in the blanks, there
are typically new consequences that can be tested. As Fraassen writes: “This is
how experimentation guides the process of theory construction, while at the same
time the part of the theory that has already been constructed guides the design
of the experiments that will guide the continuation”. For example, if we learn
that as expected individual differences moderate an effect, and the effect is
more pronounced for older compared to younger individuals, these experimental
results guide theory construction. Fraassen goes as far as to say that
“*experimentation is the continuation of theory construction by other means.*”

For a scientific realist experimentation has the main goal to test theories, not
to construct them. Exploration is still valuable but is less prominent in
scientific realism. If a theory is at the stage where it predicts something will
happen, but it not specific about what this something is, it is difficult to
come up with a result that would falsify that prediction (except for cases where
it is plausible that nothing would happen, which might be limited to highly
controlled randomized experiments). Scientific realism requires well-specified
theories. When data do not support theoretical predictions, this should be
consequential. It means a theory is less ‘truth-like’ than we thought before.

**Q6**: When a well-designed and high-powered experiment replication study does
not observe the same results as an initial finding, responses might differ
depending on whether a scientist is a scientific realist or a constructive
empiricist. For the one, theories should reflect reality, while for the other,
experimentation is the continuation of theory construction by other means. The
first might consider the difficulty in replicating the original result a big
problem for the original theory, while the second might believe this is simply a
good reason to improve the original theory. What do you think? Are both of these
views defensible? And how could scientists clarify what they think theories are
for when they develop theoretical models in their articles?

**Can You Pick Only One Philosophy of Science?**

Ice-cream stores fare well selling cones with more than one scoop. Sure, it can
get a bit messy, but sometimes choosing is just too difficult. So when it comes
to philosophy of science, do you need to pick one approach and stick to it for
all problems? I am not sure. Philosophers seem to implicitly suggest this (or at
least they don’t typically discuss the pre-conditions to adopt their proposed
philosophy of science, and seem to imply their proposal generalized across
fields and problems within fields).

Some viewpoints (such as whether there is a truth or not, and if theories have
some relation to truth) seem rather independent of the research context. It is
still fine to change your view over time (philosophers of science themselves
change their opinion over time!) but they should be somewhat stable.

Other viewpoints seem to leave more room for flexibility depending on the
research you are doing. You might not believe theories in a specific field are
good enough to be used as anything but crude verbal descriptions of phenomena. I
teach an introduction to psychology course to students at the Eindhoven
Technical University, and near the end of one term a physics student approached
me after class and said: “You very often use the word ‘theory’, but many of
these ‘theories’ don’t really sound like theories!”. If you have ever tried to
create computational models of psychological theories you will have experienced
it typically cannot be done: Theories lack sufficient detail. Furthermore, you
might feel the concepts used in your research area are not specified enough to
really know what we are talking about. If this is the case, you might not have
the goal to test theories (or try to *explain* phenomena) but mainly want to
focus on ­­conceptual progress by improving measurement techniques or accurately
estimate their effect sizes. Or you might work on more applied problems, and
believe that a specific theory is just a useful instrument that guides you
towards possibly interesting questions, but is not in itself something that can
be tested, or that accurately describes reality.

# References

Feyerabend, P. (1993). Against method (3rd ed). London: Verso.

Gelman, A., & Shalizi, C. R. (2013). Philosophy and the practice of Bayesian
statistics. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 66(1),
8–38. <https://doi.org/10/f4k2h4>

Hacking, I. (1982). Experimentation and Scientific Realism. *Philosophical
Topics, 13(1)*, 71–87. <https://doi.org/10/fz8ftm>

Keynes, J. M. (1921). A Treatise on Probability. Cambridge University Press.

Kitcher, P. (1993). The advancement of science: science without legend,
objectivity without illusions. New York: Oxford University Press.

Ladyman, J. (2002). Understanding philosophy of science. London ; New York:
Routledge.

Mayo, D. G. (2018). Statistical inference as severe testing: how to get beyond
the statistics wars. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Meehl, P. E. (2004). Cliometric metatheory III: Peircean consensus,
verisimilitude and asymptotic method. *The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 55(4)*, 615–643.

Niiniluoto, I. (1999). Critical Scientific Realism. Oxford University Press.

Rouder, J. N. (2014). Optional stopping: No problem for Bayesians. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 21(2), 301–308.

Taper, M. L., & Lele, S. R. (2011). Evidence, Evidence Functions, and Error
Probabilities. In P. S. Bandyopadhyay & M. R. Forster (Eds.), Philosophy of
Statistics (Vol. 7, pp. 513–532). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-51862-0.50015-0

![http://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/buttons/88x31/png/by-nc-sa.eu.png](media/f5eff424129e9bf343605c5494edf8c3.png)

© Daniel Lakens, 2019. This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).
