## Verisimilitude, Belief, and Progress in Psychological Science

Does science offer a way to learn what is true about our world? According to the
perspective in philosophy of science known as *scientific realism*, the answer
is ‘yes’. Scientific realism is the idea that successful scientific theories
that have made novel predictions give us a good reason to believe these theories
make statements about the world that are at least partially true. Known as the
*no miracle argument*, only realism can explain the success of science, which
consists of repeatedly making successful predictions (Duhem, 1906), without
requiring us to believe in miracles.

Not everyone thinks that it matters whether scientific theories make true
statements about the world, as scientific realists do. Laudan (1981) argues
against scientific realism based on a pessimistic meta-induction: If theories
that were deemed successful in the past turn out to be false, then we can
reasonably expect all our current successful theories to be false as well. Van
Fraassen (1980) believes it is sufficient for a theory to be ‘empirically
adequate’, and make true predictions about things we can observe, irrespective
of whether these predictions are derived from a theory that describes how the
unobservable world is in reality. This viewpoint is known as *constructive
empiricism*. As Van Fraassen summarizes the constructive empiricist perspective
(1980, p.12): “Science aims to give us theories which are empirically adequate;
and acceptance of a theory involves as belief only that it is empirically
adequate”.

The idea that we should ‘believe’ scientific hypotheses is not something
scientific realists can get behind. Either they think theories make true
statements about things in the world, but we will have to remain completely
agnostic about when they do (Feyerabend, 1993), or they think that corroborating
novel and risky predictions makes it reasonable to believe that a theory has
some ‘truth-likeness’, or *verisimilitude*. The concept of verisimilitude is
based on the intuition that a theory is closer to a true statement when the
theory allows us to make more true predictions, and less false predictions. When
data is in line with predictions, a theory gains verisimilitude, when data are
not in line with predictions, a theory loses verisimilitude (Meehl, 1978).
Popper clearly intended verisimilitude to be different from belief (Niiniluoto,
1998). Importantly, verisimilitude refers to how close a theory is to the truth,
which makes it an ontological, not epistemological question. That is,
verisimilitude is a function of the degree to which a theory is similar to the
truth, but it is not a function of the degree of belief in, or the evidence for,
a theory (Meehl, 1978, 1990). It is also not necessary for a scientific realist
that we ever know what is true – we just need to be of the opinion that we can
move closer to the truth (known as comparative scientific realism, Kuipers,
2016).

Attempts to formalize verisimilitude have been a challenge, and from the
perspective of an empirical scientist, the abstract nature of this ongoing
discussion does not really make me optimistic it will be extremely useful in
everyday practice. On a more intuitive level, verisimilitude can be regarded as
the extent to which a theory makes the most correct (and least incorrect)
statements about specific features in the world. One way to think about this is
using the ‘possible worlds’ approach (Niiniluoto, 1999), where for each basic
state of the world one can predict, there is a possible world that contains each
unique combination of states.

For example, consider the experiments by Stroop (1935), where color related
words (e.g., RED, BLUE) are printed either in congruent colors (i.e., the word
RED in red ink) or incongruent colors (i.e., the word RED in blue ink). We might
have a very simple theory predicting that people automatically process
irrelevant information in a task. When we do two versions of a Stroop
experiment, one where people are asked to read the words, and one where people
are asked to name the colors, this simple theory would predict slower responses
on incongruent trials, compared to congruent trials. A slightly more advanced
theory predicts that congruency effects are dependent upon the salience of the
word dimension and color dimension (Melara & Algom, 2003). Because in the
standard Stroop experiment the *word* dimension is much more salient in both
tasks than the *color* dimension, this theory predicts slower responses on
incongruent trials, but only in the color naming condition. We have four
possible worlds, two of which represent predictions from either of the two
theories, and two that are not in line with either theory.

|         | Responses Color Naming | Responses Word Naming |
|---------|------------------------|-----------------------|
| World 1 | Slower                 | Slower                |
| World 2 | Slower                 | Not Slower            |
| World 3 | Not Slower             | Slower                |
| World 4 | Not Slower             | Not Slower            |

In an unpublished working paper, Meehl (1990b) discusses a ‘box score’ of the
number of successfully predicted features, which he acknowledges is too
simplistic. No widely accepted formalized measure of verisimilitude is available
to express the similarity between the successfully predicted features by a
theory, although several proposals have been put forward (Niiniluoto, 1998;
Oddie, 2013, for an example based on Tversky's (1977) contrast model, see
Cevolani, Crupi, & Festa, 2011). However, even if formal measures of
verisimilitude are not available, it remains a useful concept to describe
theories that are assumed to be closer to the truth because they make novel
predictions (Psillos, 1999).

As empirical scientists, our main job is to decide which features are present in
our world. Therefore, we need to know if predictions made by theories are
corroborated or falsified in experiments. To be able to falsify a theory, it
needs to forbid certain states of the world (Lakatos, 1978). This is not easy,
especially for probabilistic statements, which is the bread and butter of
psychological science. Where a single black swan is clearly observable,
probabilistic statements only reach their true predicted value in infinity, and
every finite sample will have some variation around the predicted value.
However, according to Popper, probabilistic statements can be *made* falsifiable
by interpreting probability as the relative frequency of a result in a specified
hypothetical series of observations, and decide that reproducible regularities
are not attributed to randomness (Popper, 2002). Even though any finite sample
will show some variation, we can decide upon a limit of the variation.
Researchers can use the limit of variation that is allowed as a *methodological
rule*, and decide whether a set of observations falls in a ‘forbidden’ state of
the world, or in a ‘permitted’ state of the world, according to some theoretical
prediction.

This *methodological falsification* (Lakatos, 1978) is clearly inspired by a
Neyman-Pearson perspective on statistical inferences. Popper (2002, p. 168)
acknowledges feedback from the statistician Abraham Wald, who developed
statistical decision theory based on the work by Neyman and Pearson (Wald,
1992). Lakatos (1978, p. 25) writes how we can make predictions falsifiable by
“specifying certain rejection rules which may render statistically interpreted
evidence 'inconsistent' with the probabilistic theory” and notes: “this
methodological falsificationism is the philosophical basis of some of the most
interesting developments in modern statistics. The Neyman-Pearson approach rests
completely on methodological falsificationism”. To use methodological
falsification, Popper describes how empirical researchers need to decide upon an
interval within which the predicted value will fall. We can then calculate for
any number of observations the probability that our value will indeed fall
within this range, and design a study such that this probability is very high,
or that it’s complementary probability, which Popper denotes by ε, is small. We
can recognize this procedure as a Neyman-Pearson hypothesis test, where ε is the
Type 2 error rate. In other words, high statistical power, or when the null is
true, a very low alpha level, can corroborate a hypothesis.

Popper distinguishes between subjective probabilities (where the degree of
probability is expressed as feelings of certainty, or, belief), and objective
probabilities (where probabilities are relative frequencies with which an event
occurs in a specified range of observations. Popper strongly believed that the
corroboration of tests was based on Frequentist, not Bayesian, probabilities
(Popper, p. 434): “As to degree of corroboration, it is nothing but a measure of
the degree to which a hypothesis h has been tested, and of the degree to which
it has stood up to tests. It must not be interpreted, therefore, as a degree of
the rationality of our belief in the truth of h [the hypothesis]”. For a
scientific realist, who believes the main goal of scientists is to identify
features of the world that corroborate or falsify theories, what matters is
whether theories are truthlike, not whether you *believe* they are truthlike. As
Taper and Lele (2011) express this viewpoint: “It is not that we believe that
Bayes' rule or Bayesian mathematics is flawed, but that from the axiomatic
foundational definition of probability Bayesianism is doomed to answer questions
irrelevant to science. We do not care what you believe, we barely care what we
believe, what we are interested in is what you can show.” Indeed, if the goal is
to identify the presence or absence of features in the world to develop more
truth-like theories, we mainly need procedures that allow us to make choices
about the presence or absence of these features with high accuracy. Subjective
belief plays no role in these procedures.

To identify the presence or absence of features with high accuracy, we need a
statistical procedure that allows us to make decisions while controlling the
probability we make an error. This idea is translated into practice in
hypothesis testing procedures put forward by Neyman and Pearson (1933): “We are
inclined to think that as far as a particular hypothesis is concerned, no test
based upon the theory of probability can by itself provide any valuable evidence
of the truth or falsehood of that hypothesis. But we may look at the purpose of
tests from another view-point. Without hoping to know. whether each separate
hypothesis is true or false, we may search for rules to govern our behaviour
with regard to them, in following which we insure that, in the long run of
experience, we shall not be too often wrong.” Any procedure with good error
control can be used (although Popper stresses that these findings should also be
replicable). Some authors prefer likelihood ratios where error rates have
maximum bounds (Royall, 1997; Taper & Ponciano, 2016), but in general,
frequentists hypothesis tests are used where both the Type 1 error rate and the
Type 2 error rate are controlled.

Meehl (1978) believes “the almost universal reliance on merely refuting the null
hypothesis as the standard method for corroborating substantive theories in the
soft areas is a terrible mistake, is basically unsound, poor scientific
strategy, and one of the worst things that ever happened in the history of
psychology”. Meehl is of this opinion, not because hypothesis tests are not
useful, but because they are not used to test risky predictions. Meehl remarks
that “When I was a rat psychologist, I unabashedly employed significance testing
in latent-learning experiments; looking back I see no reason to fault myself for
having done so in the light of my present methodological views” (Meehl, 1990a).
When one theory predicts rats learn nothing, and another theory predicts rats
learn *something*, even Meehl believed testing the difference between an
experimental and control group was a useful test of a theoretical prediction.
However, Meehl believes that many hypothesis tests are used in a way such that
they actually do not increase the verisimilitude of theories are all. If you
predict gender differences, you will find them more often than not in a large
enough sample. Because people can not be randomly assigned to gender conditions,
the null hypothesis is most likely false, not predicted by any theory, and
therefore rejecting the null hypothesis does not increase the verisimilitude of
any theory. But as a scientific realist, Meehl believes accepting or rejecting
predictions is a sound procedure, as long as you test risky predictions in
procedures with low error rates. Using such procedures, we have observed an
asymmetry in the Stroop experiments, where the interference effect is much
greater in the color naming task than in the word naming task, which leads us to
believe the theory that takes into account the salience of the word and color
dimensions has higher truth-likeness.

From a scientific realist perspective, Bayes Factors or Bayesian posteriors do
not provide an answer to the main question of interest, which is the
verisimilitude of scientific theories. Belief can be used to decide which
questions to examine, but it can not be used to determine the truth-likeness of
a theory. Obviously, if you reject realism, and follow anti-realist
philosophical viewpoints such as Fraassen’s constructive empiricism, then you
also reject verisimilitude, or the idea that theories can be closer to an
unobservable and unknowable truth. I understand most psychologists do not choose
their statistical approaches to follow logically from their philosophy on
science, and instead follow norms or hypes. But I think it is useful to at least
reflect upon basic questions. What is the goal of science? Can we approach the
truth, or can we only *believe* in hypotheses? There should be some
correspondence between your choice of statistical inferences, and your
philosophy of science. Whenever I tell a fellow scientist that I am not
particularly interested in evidence, and that I think error control is the most
important goal in science, people often look at me like I’m crazy, and talk to
me like I’m stupid. I might be both – but I think my statements follow logically
from a scientific realist perspective on science, and are perfectly in line with
thoughts by Neyman, Popper, Lakatos, and Meehl.

A final benefit of being a scientific realist is that I can believe it is close
to 100% certain that this blog post is wrong, but testing my ideas against the
literature, it seems to have pretty high verisimilitude. Nevertheless, this is a
topic I am not an expert on, so use the comments to identify features of my blog
that are incorrect, so that we can improve its truth-likeness.

References

Cevolani, G., Crupi, V., & Festa, R. (2011). Verisimilitude and belief change
for conjunctive theories. *Erkenntnis*, *75*(2), 183.

Feyerabend, P. (1993). *Against method* (3rd ed). London ; New York: Verso.

Kuipers, T. A. F. (2016). Models, postulates, and generalized nomic truth
approximation. *Synthese*, *193*(10), 3057–3077.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-015-0916-9

Lakatos, I. (1978). *The methodology of scientific research programmes: Volume
1: Philosophical papers* (Vol. 1). Cambridge University Press.

Laudan, L. (1981). A confutation of convergent realism. *Philosophy of Science*,
*48*(1), 19–49.

Meehl, P. E. (1978). Theoretical Risks and Tabular Asterisks: Sir Karl, Sir
Ronald, and the Slow Progress of Soft Psychology. *Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology*, *46*, 806–834.

Meehl, P. E. (1990a). Appraising and amending theories: The strategy of
Lakatosian defense and two principles that warrant it. *Psychological Inquiry*,
*1*(2), 108–141.

Meehl, P. E. (1990b). *Corroboration and verisimilitude: Against Lakatos’ “sheer
leap of faith.”* Working Paper, MCPS-90-01). Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota, Center for Philosophy of Science. Retrieved from
http://meehl.umn.edu/sites/g/files/pua1696/f/146corroborationverisimilitude.pdf

Melara, R. D., & Algom, D. (2003). Driven by information: A tectonic theory of
Stroop effects. *Psychological Review*, *110*(3), 422–471.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.110.3.422

Neyman, J., & Pearson, E. S. (1933). On the Problem of the Most Efficient Tests
of Statistical Hypotheses. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences*, *231*(694–706),
289–337. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.1933.0009

Niiniluoto, I. (1998). Verisimilitude: The Third Period. *The British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science*, *49*, 1–29.

Niiniluoto, I. (1999). *Critical Scientific Realism*. Oxford University Press.

Oddie, G. (2013). The content, consequence and likeness approaches to
verisimilitude: compatibility, trivialization, and underdetermination.
*Synthese*, *190*(9), 1647–1687. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-011-9930-8

Popper, K. R. (2002). *The logic of scientific discovery*. London; New York:
Routledge.

Psillos, S. (1999). *Scientific realism: how science tracks truth*. London; New
York: Routledge.

Royall, R. (1997). *Statistical Evidence: A Likelihood Paradigm*. London ; New
York: Chapman and Hall/CRC.

Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions.
*Journal of Experimental Psychology*, *18*(6), 643.

Taper, M. L., & Lele, S. R. (2011). Philosophy of Statistics. In P. S.
Bandyophadhyay & M. R. Forster (Eds.), *Evidence, evidence functions, and error
probabilities* (pp. 513–531). Elsevier, USA.

Taper, M. L., & Ponciano, J. M. (2016). Evidential statistics as a statistical
modern synthesis to support 21st century science. *Population Ecology*, *58*(1),
9–29.

Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. *Psychological Review*, *84*(4),
327.

Van Fraassen, B. C. (1980). *The scientific image*. Oxford : New York: Clarendon
Press ; Oxford University Press.

Wald, A. (1992). Statistical Decision Functions. In S. Kotz & N. L. Johnson
(Eds.), *Breakthroughs in Statistics* (pp. 342–357). Springer New York.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-0919-5_22
